---
title: Fourth Week Retrospective
date: 2013-03-08 08:43 -07:00
tags: retrospective
---

####TrafficSpy Retrospective

Another week down, anothe project turned in. TrafficSpy was an interesting introduction to working with databases and web interfaces. It was hard to wrap my mind around all of the different pieces at first, but I feel like I've gained at least a basic understanding of quite a few new things: Sinatra and HTTP responses, interacting with databases using Sequel, and some postgres/sqlite. The concept of moving data in and out of the database _to_ the website _through_ ruby was difficult for me to grasp at first, but now that I've done it, the next time will be a lot easier. I liked working with Sequel, and once I figured out how to translate the SQL statements I wanted into Sequel/ruby language, I found it pretty easy to work with. I still don't really understand how the postgres backend works -- I get the relational database part, but not the postgres specifics.

Now that I've completed the project, I think it would be fun to go back and try it again in another month or so. We spent quite a bit of time upfront thinking about our database layout and getting postgres up and running, and I think that, at least for me, it hindered my writing of simple and clean code. Next time, I would probably try to take a more agile and TDD approach, working more with how the data comes in and gets processed, and worrying about normalizing the database more when I have a basic framework program going. We wrote our project in a way that left many classes and methods depending on a LOT of other classes and methods, which made it difficult to follow the code and treacherous to change things. Changing a seemingly simple method in one class could break a method in an entirely different class, and it often wasn't an obvious break until it happened. This left us spending quite a bit of time trying to debug a problem, slowly tracing back the issue through methods and classes. Not fun. This problem did teach me the importance and utility of good, informative tests.

####Big Picture Thoughts

Transitioning from straight command line interfacing ruby code to the world of the world wide web has been kind of neat. I didn't get to work on the web interfacing part of TrafficSpy much, so I'm looking forward to get into it more so I can develop cool and funcional web sites. The past two weeks were mentally exhausting and I am looking forward to a bit of a break this weekend. It will be nice to work on other hobbies a little, and has me thinking of ways I could write programs to make my hobbies better! I'm planning my vegetable garden, and haven't found a program I like for doing that, so end up with a pretty ugly series of spreadsheets and layout plans (also in an ugly spreadsheet). It's got me thinking about how I could design a program with a way to store my planting information, easily play with different garden layout plans, and keep track of a calendar for all the various seed startings and sowings, harvesting, and rotating information.

We are supposed to begin work on open source work soon, too. I've been contributing map data to OpenStreetMap for a while and would like to some day contribute to the code/documentation base as well. In past jobs I've written tutorial and process documentation materials, so I think that might be a good way for me to start contributing to a project somewhere. I've found several of the things we've used in class to be lacking in that area, so I'll probably have plenty to choose from!
